# SNIVEL
<b>Satellite Navigation-derived Instaneous Velocities</b>


This package computes GNSS velocities using the broadcast ephemeris and high-rate RINEX files. This loosely follows the method of Colisimo et al. (2012). It uses both the L1 and L2 phase observables and inverts for velocity on an epoch by epoch basis with the ionosphere free combination. There is no single frequency mode currently (i.e. <a href="https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/ssa/srl/article/89/3/1040/530132/Single-Frequency-Instantaneous-GNSS-Velocities">Grapenthin et al. (2018)</a>), however I have tested it using just L1 and it produces almost identical results. 

<b>Dependencies</b>

The following python3 packages are required:

georinex, numpy, scipy, and urllib

<b>Running the code</b>

The logic flow is rather simple:

<b>(1)</b> in the file sites_process.txt, you simple need to add 4-character station ids in lowercase. If the station is not located in UNAVCO, SOPAC, or CWU archives, you will need to put your files into a directory called 'rinex_hr'. This folder is autogenerated, so run SNIVEL.py once and you will get the directory. When you put your RINEX file in this folder, ensure that it follows standard naming convention, "SITEDOY0.YRo". If you use uppercase for <b>SITE</b>, enter it that way in the sites_process.txt file. If your RINEX is Hatanaka compressed, use the crx2rnx command to uncompress it (i.e. go from <b>YR</b>d to <b>YR</b>o). For files downloaded, the uncompression is performed automatically.
  
<b>(2)</b> in the file dates_process.txt, you enter in the dates and times you want to process. There are 4 columns in this file:

<b>YEAR</b> <b>DOY</b> <b>START_TIME</b> <b>MINUTES</b>
 
<b>YEAR</b> should always be 4 digits.
  
<b>DOY</b> is the day of year, three characters between 001 and 365/366 for leap years. Check the <a href="https://www.ngs.noaa.gov/CORS/Gpscal.shtml">NGS GPS Calendar</a> to determine your DOY.
  
<b>START_TIME</b> is the time in HR:MN:SC format that you want to start processing. Note that RINEX files use GPS time, so there is currently an 18 second difference between UTC time (GPS-UTC=18) as of Feb 2020.

<b>MINUTES</b> is simply the number of minutes you wish to process. Decimals are allowed here.

<b>(3)</b> edit the top line of SNIVEL.py with your environment path to python. Or you can just run "python3 SNIVEL.py"

<b>(4)</b> The code will do the following things once it is started:

First, it will download the briadcast orbit file for the first date given. This file will be put into a directory called <b>nav/</b>. 

Next it will try to download the RINEX file for the first site at the first date given. If the RINEX file is already in the <b>rinex_hr/</b> directory, it will skip this step.

Georinex will then read the RINEX header to determine the a priori position of the station. If this is terribly off, you should manually change this in the RINEX file and rerun the code. I haven't tested how bad it needs to be before this is a problem, but many 10s of meters would not be great. 

After this, the RINEX file is trimmed to remove non-GPS satellites and to the START_TIME and MINUTES specified in the dates_process.txt file. In subsequent versions, I will add capabilities for GLONASS, Galileo and Beidou, but for now, GPS is sufficient. 

Next, from the broadcast ephemeris file, it reads the Klobuchar ionospheric corrections. This isn't really necessary, but I already had the script and it doesn't hurt. 

At this point, a file is created in the <b>output/</b> folder that will host all of the observables to perform the velocity calculation. The file naming is <b>output/observables_SITE_DOY_YEAR.txt</b>. The columns of this file are as follows:

<i>index, gps time, gps week, gps second of week, GPS satellite number, x direction cosine, y direction cosine, z direction cosine, L1, L2, azimuth, elevation angle, L1 ionosphere correction, L2 ionosphere correction, Niell slant dry troposphere delay, dx between receiver and satellite, dy between receiver and satellite, dz between receiver and satellite</i>

